README.md, before:

# libsuola OpenSSL Engine

This project aims at developing an OpenSSL engine rigging cryptosystem implementations derived from [NaCl](https://nacl.cr.yp.to/) into OpenSSL.

The project currently supports three alternative back-end providers:

-   [libsodium](https://github.com/jedisct1/libsodium)
-   [HACL\*](https://github.com/mitls/hacl-star)
-   [donna](https://github.com/floodyberry/ed25519-donna.git)

More details are available in [this paper](https://eprint.iacr.org/2018/354.pdf).

<!-- toc -->

- [Project structure](#project-structure)
- [Installation](#installation)
  * [OpenSSL](#openssl)
  * [Back-end provider](#back-end-provider)
    + [libsodium](#libsodium)
    + [HACL](#hacl)
  * [libsuola](#libsuola)
- [Uninstall](#uninstall)
- [Usage](#usage)
  * [List algorithms](#list-algorithms)
  * [Generate private key](#generate-private-key)
  * [Generate public key](#generate-public-key)
  * [Examine a key](#examine-a-key)
  * [Sign data](#sign-data)
  * [Verify data](#verify-data)
  * [Generate cert](#generate-cert)
  * [Generate new key and cert](#generate-new-key-and-cert)
  * [Examine a cert](#examine-a-cert)
  * [ENV variables](#env-variables)
- [License](#license)
- [OID crud](#oid-crud)
  * [Ed25519](#ed25519)
- [Acknowledgments](#acknowledgments)

<!-- tocstop -->

## Project structure

The source code of the project is organized hierarchically.

```
.
├── debug
├── meths
├── ossl
├── providers
│   ├── _dummy
│   ├── api
│   ├── donna
│   ├── hacl
│   ├── libsodium
│   └── ossl
├── tests
└── suola.c
```

- `suola.c` contains the main entry point for loading of the `ENGINE`;
- `meths` contains the implementation of the OpenSSL method structures defining
  the implemented cryptosystems;
- `ossl` contains code to integrate error codes, messages, NIDs, and
  OIDs in the OpenSSL abstractions;
- `providers` contains the code to map the primitives referenced in the
  `meths` structures to the actual cryptographic implementation provider:
  * `api` describes the API that a valid provider module needs to implement;
  * `libsodium`, `hacl` and `donna` map the cryptographic functionality
    to the corresponding backend implementation;
  * `_dummy` includes boilerplate code for additional functions (e.g.\
    an empty `suola_implementation_init()` that can be used when the
    backend provider does not require any initialization before being
    used);
  * `ossl` includes boilerplate code for additional functions that are
    implemented reusing OpenSSL methods rather than a backend
    implementation (e.g.\ implement `suola_randombytes_buf()` using
    OpenSSL `RAND` module rather then the backend PRNG);
- `tests` contains code used to automate testing of the `ENGINE`;
- `debug` contains definitions used to implement the debug messaging
  system.

## Installation

### OpenSSL

```
git clone https://github.com/openssl/openssl.git openssl-master
cd openssl-master/
export OPENSSL_ROOT_DIR=/usr/local/ssl
./config -d shared --prefix=$OPENSSL_ROOT_DIR --openssldir=$OPENSSL_ROOT_DIR -Wl,-rpath=$OPENSSL_ROOT_DIR/lib
make -j4
make test
sudo checkinstall --strip=no --stripso=no --pkgname=openssl-master-debug --provides=openssl-master-debug --pkgversion=1.1.1 --default make install_sw
alias openssl=$OPENSSL_ROOT_DIR/bin/openssl
```

### Back-end provider
#### libsodium

```
git clone https://github.com/jedisct1/libsodium --branch stable
cd libsodium/
LIBSODIUM_PREFIX=/usr/local
./configure --enable-debug --prefix=${LIBSODIUM_PREFIX}
make
make check
sudo checkinstall --strip=no --stripso=no --pkgname=libsodium-debug --provides=libsodium-debug --default
mkdir -p ~/.cmake/Modules
cp contrib/Findsodium.cmake ~/.cmake/Modules/
```

#### HACL

```
git clone https://github.com/mitls/hacl-star
cd hacl-star
make build
cd build
sudo checkinstall --strip=no --stripso=no --pkgname=libhacl-debug --provides=libhacl-debug --default
sudo ldconfig
```

### libsuola

```
git clone git@bitbucket.org:romen/engine_25519.git --branch suola libsuola
cd libsuola
mkdir build
cd build
# -DUSE_DONNA=<ON|OFF> enables/disables the DONNA implementation as the provider backend, which by default is libsodium
# -DUSE_HACL=<ON|OFF> enables/disables HACL as the provider backend, which by default is libsodium
# -DHACL_PREFIX=<path> allows to specify the installation prefix for HACL, by default /usr/local
cmake -DCMAKE_BUILD_TYPE=Debug -DOPENSSL_ROOT_DIR=${OPENSSL_ROOT_DIR} -DUSE_HACL=ON ..
make
make test
#ctest --output-on-failure
#ctest --verbose
sudo checkinstall --strip=no --stripso=no --pkgname=libsuola-debug --provides=libsuola-debug --default
```

## Uninstall

```
sudo dpkg -r libsuola-debug
sudo dpkg -r libhacl-debug
sudo dpkg -r libsodium-debug
sudo dpkg -r openssl-master-debug
```

## Usage

### List algorithms

`openssl engine -c libsuola`

### Generate private key

`openssl genpkey -engine libsuola -algorithm Ed25519 -out priv.pem`

### Generate public key

`openssl pkey -engine libsuola -in priv.pem -pubout -out pub.pem`

### Examine a key

`openssl pkey -engine libsuola -in key.pem -text`

### Sign data

`openssl dgst -engine libsuola -sign priv.pem -out lsb-release.sig /etc/lsb-release`

### Verify data

`openssl dgst -engine libsuola -verify pub.pem -signature lsb-release.sig /etc/lsb-release`

### Generate cert

`openssl req -engine libsuola -x509 -config /path/to/openssl.cnf -new -key priv.pem -out cert.pem`

### Generate new key and cert

`openssl req -engine libsuola -x509 -config /usr/lib/ssl/openssl.cnf -nodes -newkey Ed25519 -keyout priv.pem -out cert.pem`

### Examine a cert

`openssl asn1parse -in cert.pem`

### ENV variables

The verbosity level of libsuola logging output is controlled by the
`SUOLA_DEBUG` environment variable, which can be set to an integer value as
detailed in this list:

-   1 (LOG_FATAL)
-   2 (LOG_ERR)
-   3 (LOG_WARN) **default**
-   4 (LOG_INFO)
-   5 (LOG_DBG)
-   6 (LOG_VRB)
-   10 (LOG_EXTRM)

*Example*: `export SUOLA_DEBUG=5` will setup libsuola to print messages with
priority `LOG_DBG` or higher (highest priority is `LOG_FATAL`).

Environment variables relevant to the project include those affecting OpenSSL,
specifically the following ones:

-   `OPENSSL_ENGINES` sets the directory from which engines are loaded (the
	default value can be obtained by `openssl version -e`
-   `OPENSSL_CONF` sets a custom configuration file (the default value is
	`$OPENSSLDIR/openssl.cnf`, `openssl version -d`)

## License

libsuola is free software: you can redistribute it and/or modify it under
the terms of the GNU Lesser General Public License as published by the
Free Software Foundation, either version 3 of the License, or (at your
option) any later version.

libsuola is distributed in the hope that it will be useful, but WITHOUT
ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of MERCHANTABILITY or
FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.
See the GNU Lesser General Public License for more details.

You should have received a copy of the GNU Lesser General Public License
along with this program.  If not, see <http://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.

The full text of the license is contained in the files `COPYING` and
`COPYING.LESSER`.

## OID crud

* [Database](http://www.alvestrand.no/objectid/)

### Ed25519

* https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc8032
* https://tools.ietf.org/html/draft-josefsson-pkix-eddsa-04
* https://tools.ietf.org/html/draft-josefsson-tls-ed25519-00
* https://tools.ietf.org/html/draft-ietf-curdle-pkix-04
* [IETF curdle mailing list archive](https://mailarchive.ietf.org/arch/search/?email_list=curdle)
* https://www.gnu.org/prep/standards/html_node/OID-Allocations.html
* [OpenPGP](https://gitorious.org/gnupg/mainline/commit/59207a86e5f40c77fed296b642bf76692e8eef65?p=gnupg:mainline.git;a=commitdiff;h=59207a86e5f40c77fed296b642bf76692e8eef65;hp=159d42ee6ab21d97f40ee129445f37209b875739)
* https://github.com/str4d/ed25519-java/pull/20

## Acknowledgments

- Supported in part by Academy of Finland grant 303814.
- This article is based in part upon work from COST Action IC1403 CRYPTACUS, supported by COST (European Cooperation in Science and Technology).

Commit message:

README.md tweaks for installation

README.md, after:

# libsuola OpenSSL Engine

This project aims at developing an OpenSSL engine rigging cryptosystem implementations derived from [NaCl](https://nacl.cr.yp.to/) into OpenSSL.

The project currently supports three alternative back-end providers:

-   [libsodium](https://github.com/jedisct1/libsodium)
-   [HACL\*](https://github.com/mitls/hacl-star)
-   [donna](https://github.com/floodyberry/ed25519-donna.git)

More details are available in [this paper](https://eprint.iacr.org/2018/354.pdf).

<!-- toc -->

- [Project structure](#project-structure)
- [Installation](#installation)
  * [OpenSSL](#openssl)
  * [Back-end provider](#back-end-provider)
    + [libsodium](#libsodium)
    + [HACL](#hacl)
  * [libsuola](#libsuola)
- [Uninstall](#uninstall)
- [Usage](#usage)
  * [List algorithms](#list-algorithms)
  * [Generate private key](#generate-private-key)
  * [Generate public key](#generate-public-key)
  * [Examine a key](#examine-a-key)
  * [Sign data](#sign-data)
  * [Verify data](#verify-data)
  * [Generate cert](#generate-cert)
  * [Generate new key and cert](#generate-new-key-and-cert)
  * [Examine a cert](#examine-a-cert)
  * [ENV variables](#env-variables)
- [License](#license)
- [OID crud](#oid-crud)
  * [Ed25519](#ed25519)
- [Acknowledgments](#acknowledgments)

<!-- tocstop -->

## Project structure

The source code of the project is organized hierarchically.

```
.
├── debug
├── meths
├── ossl
├── providers
│   ├── _dummy
│   ├── api
│   ├── donna
│   ├── hacl
│   ├── libsodium
│   └── ossl
├── tests
└── suola.c
```

- `suola.c` contains the main entry point for loading of the `ENGINE`;
- `meths` contains the implementation of the OpenSSL method structures defining
  the implemented cryptosystems;
- `ossl` contains code to integrate error codes, messages, NIDs, and
  OIDs in the OpenSSL abstractions;
- `providers` contains the code to map the primitives referenced in the
  `meths` structures to the actual cryptographic implementation provider:
  * `api` describes the API that a valid provider module needs to implement;
  * `libsodium`, `hacl` and `donna` map the cryptographic functionality
    to the corresponding backend implementation;
  * `_dummy` includes boilerplate code for additional functions (e.g.\
    an empty `suola_implementation_init()` that can be used when the
    backend provider does not require any initialization before being
    used);
  * `ossl` includes boilerplate code for additional functions that are
    implemented reusing OpenSSL methods rather than a backend
    implementation (e.g.\ implement `suola_randombytes_buf()` using
    OpenSSL `RAND` module rather then the backend PRNG);
- `tests` contains code used to automate testing of the `ENGINE`;
- `debug` contains definitions used to implement the debug messaging
  system.

## Installation

If your system already has OpenSSL, [libsodium](https://github.com/jedisct1/libsodium), etc. those corresponding source installation steps are optional for you.
Package versions from your OS provide are also likely to work, e.g. `sudo apt-get install libsodium-dev`.

### OpenSSL

```
git clone https://github.com/openssl/openssl.git openssl-master
cd openssl-master/
export OPENSSL_ROOT_DIR=/usr/local/ssl
./config -d shared --prefix=$OPENSSL_ROOT_DIR --openssldir=$OPENSSL_ROOT_DIR -Wl,-rpath=$OPENSSL_ROOT_DIR/lib
make -j4
make test
sudo checkinstall --strip=no --stripso=no --pkgname=openssl-master-debug --provides=openssl-master-debug --pkgversion=1.1.1 --default make install_sw
alias openssl=$OPENSSL_ROOT_DIR/bin/openssl
```

### Back-end provider
#### libsodium

```
git clone https://github.com/jedisct1/libsodium --branch stable
cd libsodium/
LIBSODIUM_PREFIX=/usr/local
./configure --enable-debug --prefix=${LIBSODIUM_PREFIX}
make
make check
sudo checkinstall --strip=no --stripso=no --pkgname=libsodium-debug --provides=libsodium-debug --default
mkdir -p ~/.cmake/Modules
cp contrib/Findsodium.cmake ~/.cmake/Modules/
```

#### HACL

```
git clone https://github.com/mitls/hacl-star
cd hacl-star
make build
cd build
sudo checkinstall --strip=no --stripso=no --pkgname=libhacl-debug --provides=libhacl-debug --default
sudo ldconfig
```

### libsuola

```
git clone https://github.com/romen/libsuola
cd libsuola
mkdir build
cd build
# -DUSE_DONNA=<ON|OFF> enables/disables the DONNA implementation as the provider backend, which by default is libsodium
# -DUSE_HACL=<ON|OFF> enables/disables HACL as the provider backend, which by default is libsodium
# -DHACL_PREFIX=<path> allows to specify the installation prefix for HACL, by default /usr/local
cmake -DCMAKE_BUILD_TYPE=Debug -DOPENSSL_ROOT_DIR=${OPENSSL_ROOT_DIR} -DUSE_HACL=ON ..
make
make test
#ctest --output-on-failure
#ctest --verbose
sudo checkinstall --strip=no --stripso=no --pkgname=libsuola-debug --provides=libsuola-debug --default
```

## Uninstall

```
sudo dpkg -r libsuola-debug
sudo dpkg -r libhacl-debug
sudo dpkg -r libsodium-debug
sudo dpkg -r openssl-master-debug
```

## Usage

### List algorithms

`openssl engine -c libsuola`

### Generate private key

`openssl genpkey -engine libsuola -algorithm Ed25519 -out priv.pem`

### Generate public key

`openssl pkey -engine libsuola -in priv.pem -pubout -out pub.pem`

### Examine a key

`openssl pkey -engine libsuola -in priv.pem -text`

### Sign data

`openssl dgst -engine libsuola -sign priv.pem -out lsb-release.sig /etc/lsb-release`

### Verify data

`openssl dgst -engine libsuola -verify pub.pem -signature lsb-release.sig /etc/lsb-release`

### Generate cert

`openssl req -engine libsuola -x509 -config /path/to/openssl.cnf -new -key priv.pem -out cert.pem`

### Generate new key and cert

`openssl req -engine libsuola -x509 -config /usr/lib/ssl/openssl.cnf -nodes -newkey Ed25519 -keyout priv.pem -out cert.pem`

### Examine a cert

`openssl asn1parse -in cert.pem`

### ENV variables

The verbosity level of libsuola logging output is controlled by the
`SUOLA_DEBUG` environment variable, which can be set to an integer value as
detailed in this list:

-   1 (LOG_FATAL)
-   2 (LOG_ERR)
-   3 (LOG_WARN) **default**
-   4 (LOG_INFO)
-   5 (LOG_DBG)
-   6 (LOG_VRB)
-   10 (LOG_EXTRM)

*Example*: `export SUOLA_DEBUG=5` will setup libsuola to print messages with
priority `LOG_DBG` or higher (highest priority is `LOG_FATAL`).

Environment variables relevant to the project include those affecting OpenSSL,
specifically the following ones:

-   `OPENSSL_ENGINES` sets the directory from which engines are loaded (the
	default value can be obtained by `openssl version -e`
-   `OPENSSL_CONF` sets a custom configuration file (the default value is
	`$OPENSSLDIR/openssl.cnf`, `openssl version -d`)

## License

libsuola is free software: you can redistribute it and/or modify it under
the terms of the GNU Lesser General Public License as published by the
Free Software Foundation, either version 3 of the License, or (at your
option) any later version.

libsuola is distributed in the hope that it will be useful, but WITHOUT
ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of MERCHANTABILITY or
FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.
See the GNU Lesser General Public License for more details.

You should have received a copy of the GNU Lesser General Public License
along with this program.  If not, see <http://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.

The full text of the license is contained in the files `COPYING` and
`COPYING.LESSER`.

## OID crud

* [Database](http://www.alvestrand.no/objectid/)

### Ed25519

* https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc8032
* https://tools.ietf.org/html/draft-josefsson-pkix-eddsa-04
* https://tools.ietf.org/html/draft-josefsson-tls-ed25519-00
* https://tools.ietf.org/html/draft-ietf-curdle-pkix-04
* [IETF curdle mailing list archive](https://mailarchive.ietf.org/arch/search/?email_list=curdle)
* https://www.gnu.org/prep/standards/html_node/OID-Allocations.html
* [OpenPGP](https://gitorious.org/gnupg/mainline/commit/59207a86e5f40c77fed296b642bf76692e8eef65?p=gnupg:mainline.git;a=commitdiff;h=59207a86e5f40c77fed296b642bf76692e8eef65;hp=159d42ee6ab21d97f40ee129445f37209b875739)
* https://github.com/str4d/ed25519-java/pull/20

## Acknowledgments

- Supported in part by Academy of Finland grant 303814.
- This article is based in part upon work from COST Action IC1403 CRYPTACUS, supported by COST (European Cooperation in Science and Technology).
